Arbitrage and the Law of One Price
Let 
 be a portfolio and 
 represent the value of this portfolio at time 
. Arbitrage is feasible if




The Law of One Price states that:

 for any portfolios 
 and 
 and time 



One Step Binomial Pricing Model
Variables:
 Stock

: Asset with continous compounding

: Option

: risk free rate

: up factor

: down factor

: up probability

: time to maturity

: time steps

In the simple one-step model, the price of the stock either increases or decreases with probabilities 
 and 
 respectively.



Description	Initial state	Stock goes up	Stock goes down
Stock price	
Risk free asset	
Option Value	
We aim to construct a portfolio 
 that mirrors the option value in both scenarios. From the portfolio's value, we can infer the option's value.

Thus, it must hold that 
.

For this to be the case, it must follow that:

 and


Solving for 
 and 
, we find:

 

 
 
 

Because of the law of one price it must follow that:


simplified:

 with 
 
 (*1)

Example: Call option
Using the derived formula we find:


 



As shown, our portfolio mirrors the value of the option in both scenarios. Due to the Law of One Price, it must follow that:


If we charge 5.0363$ for this option, we can construct a portfolio that mirrors the value of the option. Thus, the fair value of the option is 5.0363$.

Multi Step Binomial Pricing Model
The multi step model is based on the same logic as the single step model. In the multi step model I make the simplification, that 
 to make computation more efficient.



To compute the value of 
, we need to traverse backward through the tree, treating each step as a single-step binomial model. The first task is to calculate all possible values of the stock and option at maturity. Once we have those, we can work backward through the tree.

We view each possible state as a node in a graph. Let t be the time step and i be the Node from bottom to the top starting with 
.


 would then be 

: Value of option at node (i,j)

We can now recursively define the value of the option using the formulas derived earlier.

 with 
 

With 

Calculating the Parameters
There are different methods to determine the up and down factors. I chose the Cox, Ross & Rubinstein (CRR) method here because it ensures, that the tree is recombinant:



Notes:
(*1)


 
 

 

 


